# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-02-14

## Links

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QURheOVmqDk
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/25
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/17T8ZeF2mUPffiDvulqd_HqD_JrTNaf8ch2dFT1hMfD0/edit?usp=sharing

## Present

Benjamin Gruenbaum (@benjamingr)
Bradley Meck (@bmeck)
C J Silverio @ceejbot
Daniel Rosenwasser (@DanielRosenwasser)
Gus Caplan (@devsnek)
Jeremiah Senkpiel (@fishrock123)
Gil Tayar (@giltayar)
Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
Rebecca Turner (@iarna)
James M Snell (@jasnell)
John-David Dalton (@jdalton)
Lin Clark (@linclark)
Wassim Chegham (@manekinekko)
Matt DuLeone (@mduleone)
Michael Dawson (@mhdawson)
Myles Borins (@mylesborins)
Andrea Giammarchi (@WebReflection)
Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
Zack Schuster (@zackschuster)

## Agenda

### Announcements

### nodejs/modules

* How often and when should we meet? [#2](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/2)
  - Meeting doodle - https://doodle.com/poll/vdb8cgz483zzt2t - Default is in EST 4PM
  - **ACTION ITEM FOR MYLES**: Email people about finalized time on Friday & add to Node.js Google Calendar 
* Scope of team [#17](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/17)
  - Not chartering immediately - will come later down the line
  - Should we expand scope to include CJS components
  - Mention of a few issus by Bradley. Seems like these are EJS issues as
           Well.
  - CommonJS is frozen, we cannot table issues that will affect external
            behaviour
* Managing Signal to Noise [#15](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/15)
  - Myles to document “Discussion” Tag mechanism
* Governance and Membership Requirements [#8](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/8)
  - Do we need more time than 48 hours for approving PRs?
    - Some say yes.
    - We have a very large group; much of the time members may be caught off guard. Perhaps we need some sort of quorum.
      - Maybe a way to manage engagement?
      - Sure, but PRs are the least concerning thing. The points of conflict are typically not code changes though.
    - Just to clarify, when we talk about PRs, we’re typically talking about non-code based PRs that pertain to this group.
  - So do we want a quorum-based decision process for this repo?
    - Action item: Bradley will document this quorum policy.
      - If we have no dissenters, move forward on a given decision.
        - I.e. decision making is based on “tacit approval” - silence means approval by default
      - When necessary (e.g. objections come up), quorum is 50% of active members of the working group.
        - (Q: what is active?)
          - We expect membership activity to taper off, so whoever is currently still active.
  - What is explicit approval?
    - Something as simple as “LGTM”, :+1:, etc.
  - How do we track “active” participants?
    - Our most recent metric has been “did you fill out the form for this meeting?”
    - If someone isn’t active and just shows up for a single decision, is that fair?
    - Do we track engagement by the tracker or by meetings?
    - Does interest in a set of specific domains imply inactivity?
      - No, that’s not quite what the concern is about.
    - How about “if in the first two months, we see a lack of activity, we ask the participant to step to observer status?”
      - That can be an extremely sensitive topic. We should come up with something explicit.
  - Conclusion: continue discussing this on the issue tracker
* Online Module Summit [#9](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/9)
  - Really great knowledge-sharing exercise discussing topics we feel are important.
  - That way anyone who can’t participate can catch up with it.
  - Conclusion: Bradley will plan this out.
* Guiding Design Principles [#11](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/11)
  - Is there a difference between our design principles and our scope.
  - Bradley: “I think they’re very different - our design principles give us our goals”
    - Our scope is what we’re allowed to do.
  - Jeremiah: “Is this not different from the goals document?”
  - Conclusion: kick this back to the issue tracker
* initial GOALS declaration [#23](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/23)
  - Bradley: don’t want to pull this in yet.
    - Also, request for clarification from Webpack.
    - Will discuss further.
  - Wesley: Should have an explicit rationale for why we’ve established each goal 
    - Yes, let’s add that to the PR.

## Q&A, Other

No questions for this week.  

## Upcoming Meetings

* **Node.js Foundation Calendar**: https://nodejs.org/calendar

Click `+GoogleCalendar` at the bottom right to add to your own Google calendar.
