# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-04-11

* **Recording**: 
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/61
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1qS0_Cwfgy3hw_dOuRoiEtMtdL_QrWPcFJQrRQrXth6M/

## Present

@benjamingr - Benjamin Gruenbaum
@MylesBorins - Myles Borins
@mhdawson - Michael Dawson 
@mduleone - Matt DuLeone
@tbjers - Torgny Bjers
@bmeck - Bradley Farias
@guybedford - Guy Bedford
@devsnek - Gus Caplan
@robpalme - Rob Palmer
@jdalton - John-David Dalton
@weswigham - Wesley Wigham
@targos - Michael Zasso
@iarna - Rebecca Turner
@ljharb - Jordan Harband
@benjamn - Ben Newman
@fishrock Jeremiah Senkpiel

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### Approving PRs

* doc: add meeting notes for 2018-03-28 [#53](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/53)
  - 1 minute timebox
* doc: add meeting notes for 2018-03-14 [#50](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/50)
  - 1 minute timebox

* Expand and Refine Membership rules [#59](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/59)
  - 5 minute timebox

* Don’t have quorum so cannot approve. Myles provided overview of PR to change membership rules. Need more people to approve, no objections from those in the meeting.  

### Discussion

* Can I be an observer? [#56](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/56)
  - 3 minute Timebox
  - Ask to open PR to add himself and we’ll get quorum there, unless enough people join such that we have quorum in the meeting.
* Cache system mismatch with web [#62](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/62)
  - Bradley provide a brief summary of the issue. Difference between caching related to 
    modules with indirect links.  We need to decide if we want to be more compatible with
    web versus what it does today.  Would remove support for some use cases if we move
    toward web compatibility.
  - JDD, may allow addition of fragment to make it closer to what Node.js does
  - Rebecca Turner, added context about how symlinks are used.  Concern is where
    some modules have behaviour enabled and others don’t.  May need to diverge from
    web behaviour due to our legacy behaviour.
   - Bradley, would make things better,but still cannot could on unique key
  - If import.meta no ok for our use case, what about adding a new meta (path?)
  - Bradley, we probably need a new meta to support some use cases.  Seconded Rebecca’s
    comment as ecosystem is not well prepared to handle breaking existing Node.js usage.
  - Myles +1 on adding new meta if needed for our     use case, as opposed to trying to fit 
    with Meta.import.url if that does not fit.  Myles should we setup meeting with those working
    on standards to discuss?  No objections -> yes.
* Use Cases (Tracking Issue) [#55](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/55)
  - 35 minute timebox
  - doc for use cases
  - LJHarb took us through a number of the cases here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/10BBsIqdAXB9JR2KUzQGYbCiVugYBnxE4REBakX29yyo/edit
  - Rebecca we should number them to allow easy reference.
  - John to open Issue/PR to capture move to the next step.

  * Feature discussion based on use cases
    * discussed and captured here: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HuH5E1d_mNuziBxPDRZVjpdfmUPhqVg0MUUcYDnqwn8/edit


* Membership requirements [#43](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/43)
  - Short discussion
