# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-02-28

## Links

* **Recording**:  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PO07agjJ_1Y
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/36
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ZA_0tK8ZKoo1Lh2kLl-DIckVnYb7rOV-ASjrsjEW3mI/edit

## Present

Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)  
Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)  
Bradley Farias (@bmeck)  
C J Silverio (@ceejbot)  
Torgny Bjers (@tbjers)  
Dan DuLeone (@dduleone)  
Lin Clark (@linclark)  
Gil Tayar (@giltayar)  
Gus Caplan (@devsnek)  
Guy Bedford (@guybedford)  
Rebecca Turner (@iarna)  
Hassan Sani (@inidaname)  
Matt DuLeone (@mduleone)  
Chris Dickinson (@chrisdickinson)  
Jeremiah Senkpiel (@Fishrock123)  
Michael Zasso (@targos)  
Benjamin Gruenbaum (@benjamingr)  
Daniel Rosenwasser (@DanielRosenwasser)  
Justin Fagnani (@justinfagnani)  
Matteo Collina (@mcollina)  
Ben Newman (@benjamn)  
John-David Dalton (@jdalton)  
Michael Dawson (@mhdawson)  
Jan Krems (@jkrems)
Jordan Harband (@ljharb)

## Agenda

### Announcements

* raising hands to talk (UI in participants list)
* could use someone to take notes
* post youtube link please

### nodejs/modules

* Online Module Summit [#9](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/9)
  - Target date: end of March, beginning of April, post-upcoming-TC39   - meeting
  - Probably will be closer to UTC than other timezones.
  - Fill the Doodle if you want to attend!
  - You can suggest topics for discussion at the summit in the above issue.

* doc: add meeting notes for Feb 14 2018 [#27](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/27)
  - Notes from the last meeting
  - Any problems?
    - Nope.
    - Merged!

* doc: move code of conduct to CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md [#29](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/29)
  - Moves Code of Conduct out of the Governance document.
  - Objections?
    - Nope.
    - Merged!

* Document quorum required in order to merge PRs [#26](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/26)
  - Outstanding block from James Snell
  - Brad: background: wanted to seek quorum during meetings
    - James felt that we shouldn’t need to wait for meetings to merge PRs.
    - Could be okay to just wait for meetings to merge PRs given the small amount of time between meetings.
    - Editorial & Errata changes probably okay - don’t need a meeting to merge those types of PRs in.
  - Matteo: Can probably roll with this for now, but may want to revisit this to address James’ feedback.
  - Brad: Clarifying question: can’t merge into node itself, or nodejs/modules?
    - CJ: Hard part will be identifying consensus and documenting clearly. Any work that is done before that is work that will potentially have to be backed out.
    - Myles: Have 3-4 items on agenda that will directly touch this; let’s move forward for now.
  - Objections?
    - Consensus, let’s merge it in.

* doc: s/Google Hangouts/Zoom [#34](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/34)
  - Concerns?
    - Silence
    - Conclusion: Landed

* Governance and Membership Requirements [#8](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/8)
  - At the end of the last meeting, we reached quorum/consensus that people who haven’t filled in the Doodle would be moved into observer status.
    - Some individuals felt that this was not in the spirit of the Node foundation; potentially a pre-optimization for a problem that hasn’t occurred.
    - Request to keep people around who didn’t get the chance to fill out the Doodle last time.
    - Perhaps we want to just keep everyone as members until we actually hit a problem?
  - Wesley: what percentage is quorum?
    - 1 person above 50% of total membership
    - But we only have the exact quorum of people here today
      - Actually we have 26!
      - We had 21 just a few minutes ago
        - That’s indeed why we had a concern originally.
  - Anyone who’s observer status: anyone have an objection to having been moved over?
  - LJHarb: may need a more comprehensive criteria of participation; lots of anxiety about what engagement means given other obligations.
  - Brad: Quorum PR had a timeline for how quickly PRs can be merged in; potentially should address concerns of participation?
  - Myles: proposal so that people moved to observer status can request to be moved back to participators
  - Jan: idea of moving people to observer status and then making them go through a process seems unnecessary
  - MichaelD: Either reverse or send an email to the list with the request to renew membership
  - Hassan: process was confusing, we need a more agreeable standard to move people to observer status
  - Myles: would like to move people from observer status back to participants, figure out what to do when we actually hit a problem with quorum.
    - Objections?
      - None
      - Proceed.

* maintain a summary document/website [#35](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/35)
  - Let’s timebox to 5 minutes?
  - Gus C: community as a whole seems pretty disengaged from what’s going on, hard for people to keep track of node eps
    - Want to keep the community informed about where things stand here.
  - Brad: Originally tried to use a wiki for this, became a dumping ground for different interop ideas. Without a known state of things, does it make sense to explain the current state of things?
  - tbranyen: would be helpful to have an FAQ-style list to explain how things get to where they are.
  - Brad: will probably be months before we want to put anything on the website
  - Myles: does it make sense to at least start thinking about where the site will live/what it will look like/what the copy will be like?
  - Matteo: There’s definitely a need in the community to understand why things are the way which they are.
  - Rebecca: When we come to consensus on things, that’s probably the appropriate time to add it to this document.
  - Myles: maybe add something to document things like knowns, known unknowns, etc.
  - Gil: this sort of thing may slow us down
  - Wesley: context for why things are the way they are may be more important than just how things are.
  - Jeremiah: high level objectives might be good to put into that document.
  - Conclusion: kick it back to the repo, bring it up in the next meeting

* Scope of team [#17](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/17)
* Guiding Design Principles [#11](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/11)
* initial GOALS declaration [#23](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/23)
  - CJ: request a reset of the goals document
    - Would like the group to back up and take a more user-centric approach
    - List use-cases we want to support with ESM, with interop, and more.
    - Allows us to focus on the problem: how will Node users write with ES modules to write JS programs.
    - Implementations will fall out more easily given the use-cases we want to support.
  - Matteo: there is a spec which gives Node leeway, but a lot of behavior is dictated by the spec.
    - Can end up with Babel modules if we just go against the spec.
  - Brad
    - When we talk about “user-centric” goals, agree; we should remove any goals that are driven by implementation-details.
    - Would also like not to talk purely about how CommonJS works.
      - Have to think about how the web browsers work; we can’t dictate how browsers will work.
  - LJHarb
    - use-cases are best way to explain why we are making the decisions which we are.
    - Use-cases are also what motivated current implementation; see this as less of a reset, more of a review
  - CJ: spec is a living document; spec shapes how we implement, but if we find a place where the spec is incompatible with the use-cases we have in mind, we should bring that to TC39 to explain how ECMA-262 is not allowing Node to provide those use-cases
  - Jan: use-cases can be motivated by how Node users use CommonJS today
  - Justin F: want to bring web perspective, think more about ergonomics about modules on the web, use this as a way to provide feedback to bring a solid experience to both ecosystems

### nodejs/node

* esm: Implement esm mode flag [#18392](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/18392)
  - https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1xK1ana_TIxfAHX33CYVHFnJsV0If_YirLtRBBga9cv0/edit?usp=sharing
  - Builds on proposal of using .mjs a differentiator as well as wykatz’s “In Defense of .js”
    - Introduces a ‘module’ field to package.json
  - Problems with module field: Most build tools will use ambiguous syntax detection mechanisms in conjunction with the ‘module’ field.
  - Idea: for a .js file, walk up to a package.json, see if it has “mode”: “esm”, treat it as an ES module if so.
    - Pros
      - Enables .js in Node for ES modules
      - Provides relatively simple interop in the ecosystem
      - Packages can upgrade to ES Modules as a non-breaking change.
  - Build tools already work similarly; integrating with that would be ideal
  - Myles
    - bring questions/comments/concerns to the PR itself
    - How do we want to interact with PRs in core itself?
  - Rebecca
    - Should discourage any module-related work in core.
    - Would feel bad for contributors if any work was overridden.
  - Brad
    - Have spent >4 years working on this; expect wasted work
    - With an implementation, we can see implementation problems themselves.
    - So don’t want to stop ongoing work
  - Myles: will open issue to discuss ways to deal with conflict within the group
  - Guy
    - keep in mind, things that might be considered a reset might actually be fairly small changes in practice
    - Also: please look at PR! Can be merged in, but lacks critical feedback currently.

## Q&A, Other

* Did not have time to do Q/A

## Upcoming Meetings

* **Node.js Foundation Calendar**: https://nodejs.org/calendar

Click `+GoogleCalendar` at the bottom right to add to your own Google calendar.
