# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-03-14

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U9xG4JPdznA  
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/47
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1fwQ_XkYyJO3p5fE2o9H9i7iWii0LB4OyQxepBlaa6-Y/edit

## Present

- Ben Newman (@benjamn)
- Benjamin Gruenbaum (@benajingr)
- Bradley Farias (@bfarias)
- C J Silverio (@ceejbot)
- Chris Dickinson (@chrisdickinson)
- Daniel Rosenwasser (@DanielRosenwasser)
- Gil Tayar (@giltayar)
- Gus Caplan (@devsnek)
- Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
- Hassan Sani (@inidaname)
- Jan Olaf Krems (@jkrems)
- Jeremiah Senkpiel (@Fishrock123)
- John-David Dalton (@jdalton)
- Jordan Harband (@ljharb)
- Justin Fagnani (@justinfagnani)
- Lin Clark (@linclark)
- Matt DuLeone (@mduleone)
- Michael Zasso (@targos)
- Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
- Rebecca Turner (@iarna)
- Torgny Bjers (@tbjers)
- Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.


### nodejs/modules

#### Approving PRs ~ 1 minute timebox

* doc: add meeting notes for 2018-02-28 [#38](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/38)
  * No objections!

#### For awareness ~ 3 minute timebox

* doc: add MANIFESTO.md [#45](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/45)
  * Remove stuff relating to implementation.
    * Should occur later today.
    * Please look over this!

* Use Cases Meeting [#41](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/41)
  * Brad created a forum to discuss different use-cases.
  * Pattern in GitHub discussions to go in-depth into use-cases.
  * Maybe someone else should run that.
    * Please chime in if you're interested.
  * We have time to discuss that today.

* Online Module Summit [#9](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/9)
  * Had a doodle open for several weeks - decided it will be on the April 3rd.
  * Schedule should be out around Wednesday next week.

### Discussion

* Upstream changes to ESM in nodejs/node [#42](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/42)
    * Bradley: is there anything controversial around vm.module?
    * JDD, Wesley, DanielR, CJ: Seconding notion that avoiding new functionality that is user-facing seems reasonable
    * Named exports: any objections?
      * Bradley: We just said we wanted to avoid user-facing functionality, but that's user-facing functionality.
      * Wesley: We are concerned over named exports being a general mechanism beyond Node's core modules.
      * Jeremiah: \[\[follow-up, something about get-accessors]]
      * Rebeca: Will have to address things on a case-by-case basis
      * Jordan: concerned with anything going forward that can leak into the package ecosystem; should have a lot of caution around what we do.
  * Gil: Instead of setting up principles, maybe we should just decide things on a case-by-case basis.
  * Myles: want "push over pull" - hard to make people keep up to date on everything.
 
* Use Cases for ESM in Node.js
  * CJ
    * https://gist.github.com/ceejbot/d8703c71dd5cfba4ba93e755371e96e7
    * Use-cases that explicitly have no implementation detail in mind.
  * Jeremiah
    * How large do you imagine this list getting?
  * Bradley
    * I like the list, but I want to see adjustments about how the use-cases are fulfilled.
      * Perhaps things are too specific? e.g. code coverage is achieved, maybe not necessarily via a loader hook
  * Daniel: don't be too afraid of the length of the list until it becomes a problem
  * Jan: What about existing direction around code-coverage?
    * CJ: V8's code coverage functionality is speculative at this point; not clear that it satisfies all the use-cases people have in mind.
  * Bradley: keep language in mind! We didn't say anything disparaging just now, but be respectful of others' efforts.
  * Guy: as someone who's worked with/on transpilers as first-class citizens, I do wonder whether the use-case is worthwhile.
    * It'll probably be done in some form, but is it worth listing?
    * Justin: should probably consider it a use-case, not clear if it should be discouraged, but compat concern is a valid one.
  * Daniel: even if we feel like it's not a valid scenario, we should consider them as use-cases if people are doing it today
  * Wesley: ESM should not be seen as an opportunity to start again
  * Ben: Keep in mind other module formats beyond CJS
  * Chris: Easy to try to "editorialize" what we want to do, but it's worth reviewing the use-cases after thinking them through.
  * Jan: We're considering what people do today, but what about what people will *want* to do in the future?
  * Myles: Please fill up that form with use-cases and we can iterate!
    * Maybe a Google Doc (I swear I'm not trying to sell everyone on using Google Docs!) would be easier to iterate on than on GitHub issues?

* WASM/ES Module integration (Lin Clark)
  * (hopefully I've done this presentation justice! - @DanielRosenwasser)
  * Would like users to be able to use import/export .wasm files from .js files.
  * Importing & exporting ESM declarations reference the same memory locations.
  * Steps in typical ESM
    * Construction: fetch module files, turn them into module records, recursively fetch dependencies (\[\[RequestedModules]]), do the same.
    * Instantiation:
      * Depth-first post-order traversal.
      * Module environment records will be created if necessary
    * Evaluation
      * Bindings are linked together; for variables, set to 'undefined' until set by the respective exporting module.
  * How would this work in WASM?
    * Similar steps
    * What about cyclic dependencies?
      * Live bindings may not work because these values need to be set to undefined, but wasm only sees numeric values.
      * May have to work with TC39 to just remove cyclical import restriction for non-JS module dependencies.
    * Difficult to do eager construction (e.g. bundling)
      * Need to figure this out.
  * Bradley: Problems with live bindings importing from JS?
 
