# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-12-05

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OyLCPXym7bE
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/236
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1b5aA1jiYRSjjvjIwU2pt1FK7OiaR5EMLmM72E9oR9pI/edit

## Present

- Saleh Abdel Motaal (@SMotaal)
- Michael Zasso (@targos)
- Bradley Farias (@bmeck)
- Gus Caplan (@devsnek)
- Matt DuLeone (@mduleone)
- Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
- Kevin Smith (@zenparsing)
- Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
- Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
- Guy Bedford (@guybedford)

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### nodejs/modules

* Locking down the "process" and "Buffer" globals [#235](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/235)

- Guy: tried to prev remove Buffer/process globals. Was untenable due to performance. Lots of capabilities that might not be desirable to give to all modules. As we move towards security we want to lock down some of those capabilities. If we can lock these down, the time to do it is before we ship if we apply it to ESM. e.g. we could lock down `fs` by removing it from a 3rd party package using a resolver. Approach idea is to make global.process/global.Buffer warnings and add them to the CJS wrapper.
- Jordan: Buffer is a weird thing to be a global. Like the idea of limiting the privilege granting things from process as being a global. Platform detection uses the fact that `process` is a global so we might look at removing dangerous parts rather than the entire global. ESM is a reason to restrict module capabilities. Any feature of that nature should work for CJS. We should not leverage the ESM initiative to directly change features outside of ESM. These changes are not the scope of the ESM working group.
- Myles: CJS interop means that we could export these privileged capabilities. We should record what privileged bits of the process people are using, and we might be able to deprecate the `process` global. Don't think we can ever truly remove `process` from CJS.
- Jordan: If things are possible in CJS but not ESM it is a barrier to migrate to ESM.
- Jeremiah: Buffer was tried to be deprecated in the past (citation?) but it didn't work out. process and Buffer shouldn't be globals but soo much stuff relies on it that removing things is extremely difficult to do. If we removed things in both environments that seems possible (?), but if it only affects ESM that seems confusing. Has anyone looked at how this affects existing solution like webpack?
- Wes: Webpack/Typescript/Babel migration is extra work, if you want to do big breaking migrations you can do it. Making changing during ESM implementation is being argued as a possible time. Most people don't want to do big breaking changes to existing code.
- Guy: the upgrade path is adding 2 imports to your module. I am optimistic about this path. When doing environment detection, need a replacement workflow. How do we want users of modules to determine the environment/host they are running on.
- Kevin: Expanding scope is something we should be careful of. Expanding scope makes it hard to understand the problems we are trying to solve.
- Myles: PR around namespaces. If we have a @nodejs namespace inside of core we could be putting things there. Streams are a good example of this. Larger platform question about if this could be a pattern amongst the greater JS ecosystem. Could shim @nodejs in the browser with something like import maps.
- Jordan: Built-in language modules is desired and people are excited about. Recently there was a concrete proposal https://github.com/tc39/proposal-javascript-standard-library . No one has figured out how to make this work w/ polyfilling/shimming and deleting or denying access to them. We might not want to put our hopes on that.
- Myles: Node Collab summit and TC39 might want to spend time around cross platform concerns.
- Guy: Was hoping to get some thinking about module security here, and can go to node core with it.

* Dynamic Modules Status [#188](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/188)

- Guy: Slides from last TC39 https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1--k5tJmhXJeLlUOmBdHGK3my9VCbZVL0MF8OrTeqS0I/edit#slide=id.p
- Guy: Some changes related to namespaces and cycles since the last meeting. Consensus at the TC39 meeting was some questions about behaviors and we had a breakout. Main question was re-exporting using export * from a dynamic module could cause unknown export names during linking, causing errors. TC39 felt that changes to make this not work so that dynamic behavior does not cascade into ESM was desirable. Open to extending that restriction over time, we could revisit use cases in the future. Next meeting will present the changed spec.
- Gus: Accessing unfinished namespaces is already possible
- Guy: You can access namespaces in cycle before execution, but they have all the exported names already. You cannot know the names of CJS prior to execution, so there is a pending phase for dynamic modules, that is not part of ESM.
- Myles: Order of operation concern. TC39 said they would do it if V8 does it which was waiting on signal from TC39 that it is ok and is now waiting on signal from Node.
- Guy: Correct, TC39 has provisional approval, V8 is pending Node approval. We can then do this step by step to get it to TC39. Could start bringing the impl into our work already.
- Myles: we could float that patch in our fork.
- Jordan: Some reflection methods work but some throw on ESM namespaces that have not evaluated. Haven't found a way to make it work without terrible workarounds. Someone asked why these namespaces are reflectable anyway. If we make all ESM namespaces non-reflectable during cycles this problem might go away.

Conclusion: we need to have some follow ups. Will make an issue/statement from Node core about endorsing this.

### nodejs/ecmascript-modules

* \[Do not merge\] doc: Add pkg-exports proposal to resolve spec [#14](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/14)
  - Jan: This is a PR about the "exports" in package.json. Planned on rewriting this based upon Resource loading based upon other doc if/when we put things into Resource based loading. The algorithm in terms of name resolution should not be changed due to any such things and it would just require a refactoring without logic changes.
- Geoffrey: Should we set of goal by next meeting to have the spec document to be done. This gives us homework/time to open any issues on that repo. That would let us have final consensus.
- Bradley: Would like to see write up on thrashing when 2 packages produce a cycle.
- Jan: Behavior doesn't allow for chaining, relative semantics are not allowed to be aliased/go through this other resolution mechanism.
- Myles: Would like to see something other than the empty string for the "main", (leading slash??). How do people feel about extending what the root means. This might be meta-data that could be used to generate import maps. We might want Domenic's input on this.
- Bradley: Uncomfortable with leading slash being rewritten.
- Jan: This is based upon the import map proposal. Leading slash Myles pointed out was after bare name in a specifier. We can revisit empty string.

* Specify import file specifier resolution proposal [#19](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/19)

- Guy: this is a compliment proposal to what Jan was presenting. The implementation matches Geoffrey's repo. Takes that and turns it into spec language. Hope is that we can discuss specifics w/ the proposals. 
- Geoffrey: Lets try not to put every possible concern about the spec on that PR, please open issues on the proposal repo. Leading slash can be done in another PR if we want it, this is not the last PR we will have and we can add it on as desired. Empty string vs … , all are up for debate and it is bikesheddy at this point. Behavior is locked down it seems.
- Myles: How does this change the loader?
- Geoffrey: This introduces "package scope" also called "package boundary". 2 parts of resolution: location and interpretation. Locating file for an import specifier like `import "lodash"` -> file:///…/lodash/… . This is about interpretation, find the package scope for any located file and read the package.json to know what to do with the file. If it has something flagging the package as ESM you could understand that files are ESM.
- Myles: this is package.json data on how .js files are interpretted? How far does this go?
- Geoffrey: this currently only discusses .js but for any file with a parse goal we may want to deal with this
- Jordan: for packages it seems good to have import-map style rewriting of where files are. Why aren't we doing this for both ESM and CJS. For parsing goals we could benefit from having this in CJS.
- Bradley: We can apply this to a CJS loader that we have discussed in the past. We need the collision-less intention of a format that this proposal supplied if we are to apply it to CJS as well. I will voice strong objection if I am unable to find a way that proposals could not *theoretically* work in CJS, that doesn't cover actual implementation though. Modules work shouldn't be held up by the CJS implementation of this feature.
