# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-05-09

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4vOltZBEFvM
* **GitHub Issue**:  https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/78
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1o6VUMBgZxS1bwmj2BahiGYxZwGqLXudABhbvIkDduXw/edit

## Present

- Bradley Farias (@bmeck)
- Geoffrey Booth (@geoffreyBooth)
- Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
- Hassan Sani (@inidaname)
- Jeremiah Senkpiel (@fishrock123)
- John-David Dalton (@jdalton)
- Jordan Harband (@ljharb)
- Michael Dawson (@mhdawson)
- Rebecca Turner (@iarna)
- Rob Palmer (@robpalme)
- Sven Sauleau (@xtuc)
- Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### Approving PRs (4 Minute Time Box)
* governance: introduce PR exemptions for minutes [#72](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/72)
  * No objections
* doc: add 2018-04-25 notes [#73](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/73)
  * No objections

### Approving Observers (1 minute timebox)

* add tzmanics as observer (@tzmanics) [#76](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/76)
  * No objections

### Discussion

* Use Cases (Tracking Issue) [#55](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/55)

* Modules team: @nodejs/modules
  - Opening comments
    - John-David Dalton (JDD):
      - Node 10+ released with `util.types.isModuleNamespaceObject`
      - [PR #20403](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/20403) simplified now that
        [V8 bug](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/v8/issues/detail?id=5773) is fixed
      - On the user-land front JDD is experimenting with getting APM packages and
        module mocking working.
    - Jordan Harband:
      - Node 10 introduced a new core module, `fs/promises`, and Node 10.1.0
        moved it to `fs.promises`. Can we figure out a way for core modules to
        not conflict with bare packages in npm? The rough consenses was that
        after `http2` they won't add new core modules without coming up with a
        way to avoid clobbering bare npm packages. Maybe a special Node namespace.
        Ideas welcomed.
      - RFC on [ways to prevent new node core modules from conflicting with npm](https://github.com/nodejs/TSC/issues/389)
    - Michael Dawson:
      - If the group thinks there is/ or is-not a linkage to ESM please chime in
        to provide feedback.

  - Use case review (55 minute timebox)
    - Geoffrey Booth
      - Use case #40. The average user sees that Node added support for
        import/export syntax so they should be able to drop Babel trasnforms for
        import/export and it just works. For users the feature is the syntax.
    - JDD
      - Sounds like transparent migration
    - Geoffrey Booth
      - Use case #41. Ensure CJS is continued to be supported without refactoring.
    - Jeremiah
      - We have a some cases of things doable in CJS that isn't doable in ESM
    - Bradley Farias
      - Takes issue with wording the feature as "synchronous" and would rather
        name it "conditional".
    - JDD
      - Added conditional imports to the feature doc
      - Added synchronous imports to the features doc (Jordan Harband created a use case for it)
    - Geoffrey Booth
      - Use case #47 -
      - Importing a JSON file
    - JDD
      - We should look up feature for WASM, HTML import feature... (TODO: JDD)
    - Wesley Wigham
      - TypeScript use case #42
    - Bradley Farias, JDD, and Rebecca Turner
      - Requests more info (Wes expanded https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/80)
    - Rebecca Turner
      - We may have quorum if we can count those that cast their votes
        before the meeting.
    - _Resolved pending PRs and Observer approvals_
    - Bradley Farias
      - Gus Caplan has a concern about dynamic imports and thenable results.
    - Guy Bedford
      - The `vm.Module` API breaks down with a dynamic import that returns a thenable
        result. Gus' proposal is to add a symbol that will treat the "thenable" as
        a plain object. (https://github.com/devsnek/proposal-symbol-thenable)
    - Rob Palmer
      - When the topic has come up before there has been strong views from
        Domenic Denicola (Google) who wants a solution that can apply for Promises
        in general and not namespace objects.
    - Geoffrey Booth
      - What are next steps?
    - JDD
      - We should start discussion issues on specific features.
      - We have ~17 features to choose from. Pick one that you're passionate
        about. We'll tag them as discussion.
    - Geoffrey Booth
      - Continue the yes-and mindset?
    - JDD
      - Yes. Try to be open minded and yes-and. Since we are fleshing things out
        you will come into a discussion where "as things are now XYZ is not doable".
        I encourage folks to think about what would need to be changed or tweaked
        to enable a feature for a givien use case. So people know where the
        roadblocks are going to be.
    - Bradley Farias
      - I 2nd that.
      - We shouldn't limit ourselves to just tweaking an implementation.
      - We're still behind an experimental flag. We can scrap large chunks
        if needed.
    - JDD
      - Try to enable and empower.
      - Start those discussion threads.
