# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-10-03

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KJ5sQq9X_e4
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/190
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lJ94nnBEBdwadOXTay-IwgxGzOTg2WFRuHl5dWFJZKA/edit

## Present

- Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
- John-David Dalton (@jdalton)
- Matt DuLeone (@mduleone)
- Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
- Daniel Rosenwasser (@DanielRosenwasser)
- Rob Palmer (@robpalme)
- Saleh Abdel Motaal (@SMotaal)
- Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
- Gus Caplan (@devsnek)
- Michael Zasso (@targos)
- Guy Bedford (@GuyBedford)

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### Update on Progress (5 Minute Timebox)

* Session at Collab Summit Vancouver [#177](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/177)
  - 2 minute timebox
  - We'll have a Zoom chat during this.
  - No question.
* Terminology
  - 2 minute timebox
  - Refs:
    - Create Terminology.md [#158](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/158)
    - Terminology: Stipulative Terms [#184](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/184)
  - We were really just dealing with normative terms, but we might want to go deeper in our definitions
  - Want to define stipulative terms - a more specialized way to define these ideas.
  - Really specific ideas of what we mean when we say something like "browser interop"

### Discussion (50 Minute Timebox)

* Surveys
  - 15 minute timebox
  - Refs:
    - Developer Survey [#85](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/85)
    - Surveys: Initial Drafts [#173](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/173)
    - Surveys: Purpose and Scope [#182](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/182)
  - Have time between Tuesday and Thursday to work on this.
  - Didn't have a great way to get input on the survey. 
  - Idea: ask 3-4 people at the summit for their perception of the survey to get an idea of what we could do better. (e.g. asking questions differently, clarifying meaning of questions).
  - Have a unique group who we can check with.

* Minimal Kernel
  - 30 minute timebox
  - Refs:
    - doc: first pass at minimal-kernel [#180](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/180)
    - Minimal kernel [ecmascript-modules#6](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/6)
  - Any objections to the current functionality in the minimal kernel?

* Lack of quorum
  - Do we need some people to step down to observer status?
  - Also, want people to move from observer to members!
  - Ironically, need to have quorum to make some changes to get easier quorum.

* APIs around require
  - Has anyone had any thoughts around the `createRequireFunction` APIs?
  - There's a set of common scenarios that require composing several other existing APIs
    - Wesley: Someone else is going to do this, so maybe it'd make sense to build it into core.
  - Gus: import() also should subsume these scenarios.
    - Myles: there will be scenarios where people want a dynamic CJS module to come in as something that's not a module.
      - Gus: yes, but that's not the common scenario.
  - Geoffrey: I just don't see what the use-case is here for modules.
  - Gus: This was originally to solve a use-case around tooling - it can be used in an all CJS environment.
  - Rob: a lot of people use `require(...)` for lazy synchronous loading, so it definitely has a use-case.

Guy Bedford arrived! We have quorum!

* Proposals
  - Moving Kevin Smith to an active member
    - Unanimous!
  - Landing PR [#180](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/180)
    - Unanimous!
  - [ecmascript-modules#6](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/6)
    - Unanimous!

* Phases
  - Myles: Sounds like we can start moving into phase 2
    - Wesley: phase 2 is when we do things that could potentially block things off in the future, right?
      - Myles: potentially! But it could just be a phase where we make things more ergonomic, but not necessarily blocking.
  - Rob: a document would be the most efficient way of aggregating feedback from the group.
  - Geoffrey: \[\[return to this]]
    - Myles: do you think writing inline MIME types is the most ergonomic option?
      - Geoffrey: this is the current design; if there are any other ideas, provide feedback
  - Myles: there are several people who are focused around loaders. Probably a good idea to get those people discussing their vision around loaders in the next meeting. 
  - Saleh: one problem with --experimental-modules is that without module graph optimizations, things might not be good enough.
    - Jordan: what's your criteria for "good enough"? We already have people using babel-node and ts-node, and while they're relatively slow, many people consider them good enough.
    - Is this a question of native vs. JS?
    - Really just want performance to be a key concern.
      - Myles: everything that goes into Node core has a lot of scrutiny on performance.
  - Saleh: as we consider loaders, we should envision how they might work in the browser and how they could come with a standard.
  - Jan: Thinking about package name maps might be better to think of sooner rather than later.
    - Myles: direct support could be done via a loader, so not necessarily mutually exclusive
    - Jordan: it's insanely premature to do work around announcements for yarn pnp or tink/crux
  - Kevin: It's an exciting time! We should experiment with these different ideas.
  - Myles: Wesley said that pnp/tink are like incremental caches, but they're also hijacking the resolution process to do this. This kind of gives a strong signal that there's a need for experimentation.
- Proposal:
  - Phase 2: Uncontroversial things not related to loaders
  - Phase 3: Flexible loaders that allow experimentation/learning to inform Phase 4
  - Phase 4: Hard decisions (things that may exclude certain use-cases)
