# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2018-10-24

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WES0lGeneNs
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/206
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/10HOj79n61bSGXEh6CKfaeB4mc0KW4wwB_EsTh6MVs1k/edit

## Present

- Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
- Matt DuLeone (@mduleone)
- Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
- John-David Dalton (@jdalton)
- Daniel Rosenwasser (@DanielRosenwasser)
- Gil Tayar (@giltayar)
- Saleh Abdel Motaal (@smotaal)
- Gus Caplan (@devsnek)
- Michael Zasso (@targos)
- Rob Palmer (@robpalme)
- Jordan Harband (@ljharb)

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### Approving PRs (7 Minute Timebox)

* add @soldair to observers [#200](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/200)
  - consensus
* Create Terminology.md [#158](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/158)

### Update on Progress (8 Minute Timebox)

* Terminology: Stipulative Terms [#184](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/184)
  - 4 minute timebox
* Surveys:
  - 4 minute timebox
  - Refs:
    - Purpose and Scope [#182](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/182)
    - Initial Drafts [#173](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/173)
    - Developer Survey [#85](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/85)

### Discussion (40 Minute Timebox)

* Doc: Phase 2 for new modules implementation [#196](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/196)
  - 30 minute timebox

* keeping ecmascript-modules up to date [#197](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/197)
  - 5 minute timebox
* Discussion about an implicit (or explicit) "node" scheme [#169](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/169)
  - 5 minute timebox

* Update on Dynamic Modules [#188](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/188)
  - Guy Bedford needed to drop, punted to next meeting

## Invited

* Modules team: @nodejs/modules

## Notes

The agenda comes from issues labelled with `modules-agenda` across **all of the repositories in the nodejs org**. Please label any additional issues that should be on the agenda before the meeting starts.

* Terminology: Stipulative Terms [#184](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/184)
  - Saleh: We created a branch that's been out for a bit now to try to clarify specific terms we want to use within this group.
  - Has been enough time for people to object to take a look, so... do that!
  - Myles: What's the deal with the deprecated terms? Does that mean we can't use those terms? For example, "transparent interop" is listed there.
    - Saleh: Everyone has a different interpretation of transparent interop, so it didn't seem like we were productive using these terms and talking past each other. Maybe "deprecated" is not the right term?
    - Myles: as an ask, can we eventually separate out the deprecated section, create a policy around that, and as we make the changes please squash the commits
* Surveys:
  - 4 minute timebox
  - Refs:
    - Purpose and Scope [#182](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/182)
    - Initial Drafts [#173](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/173)
    - Developer Survey [#85](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/85)
  - Saleh: I feel pretty uncomfortable putting questions on the survey that aren't representative of what the group is interested in
    - Overall the survey was well-received (in terms of willingness to answer the survey), but the questions themselves need feedback from the group
    - Saleh's dog: *barking* (okay, they did)
  - Saleh: it would be great if we could iterate more with Google Docs
  - Myles: it might be productive to set up a meeting outside of this biweekly discussion

* Doc: Phase 2 for new modules implementation [#196](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/196)
  - 20 minute timebox
  - Geoffrey: Idea of phases is "what's the next lowest-hanging fruit that we could start implementing?"
  - Finishing any given phase doesn't mean we're done.
  - Also, things aren't set in stone.
  - Saleh: [fill in here] (see new issue [#208](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/208)
    - Bradley: I am against that point, but we can chat offline about that.
  - Geoffrey: wanted not to discuss specific technical details here
  - Jan: Not sure how I feel about first bullet (virtual module integration), third bullet (importing from package names) has a lot of implied semantics
    - `import "lodash/index.mjs"` doesn't work today?
      - Myles: think it does, but not totally clear
    - Jan: anyway, I don't think any of them should work; otherwise npm and yarn will end up hacking around whatever we do 
    - Myles: regardless of what happens with the packagers, node_modules, package name maps, etc., throwing away node_modules would cause an ecosystem fracture
    - Jan: but how is this different from any other loader we'd want people to use? node_modules resolution seems like it could be part of a custom loader.
    - Geoffrey: the idea is just to make bare path importing possible in the first place.
      - Bradley: I don't know how we're going to make this possible without *some* default. If we can't come to consensus on that default, then we need to push out of stage 2
    - Kevin: what if we swapped phase 2 with phase 3? That might give us some clarity over the points in stage 2.
    - Are we ready to talk about loaders? Do we have an implementation?
      - Bradley: they exist ephemerally but we really need people to raise loaders as a discussion point - not enough people are talking about them.
  - Myles: maybe stage 2 could be a stage of things that are completely unrelated to loaders.
  - Gil: Clarification: what are "virtual modules"?
    - Saleh: a module that doesn't exist on disk, but that can be created from some source text. For example, want to create a "virtual" module from a service worker.
  - Jan: Overall, ideally we'd have some sort of default loader that builds on Node loader API
  - Bradley: Loader spec started in TC39 and was discontinued; Realms proposal has evolved from that and it's a string-based API. If you're interested in why it's bad to introduce arbitrary objects into the module graph, you too can join this group which spends 4 hours a week discussing the matter.
  - Objections?
    - Only if we're intent on shoving things into the module graph.
    - Myles: can we at least say we want to explore it in phase 2, without implying an implementation?
    - Can we look at both implementations?
      - Bradley: no, don't want to take the decisions here that lightly. People have spent years on this, and we're not even in touch with with Realms people.
    - Saleh: I object to something like createDynamicModule (if loaders canâ€™t evaluate ESM)
      - Myles: this is probably more implementation-specific than the point implies. Can we at least just say we're exploring? Perhaps engaging with the Realms team as well?
  - Do we have any objections? For point 3 (`import _ from "lodash"`) can we just retitle this to something like "exploring supporting" rather than just "supporting"?
    - "Explore design space for virtual module from source"
    - Point 4 (out-of-band command line disambiguation) doesn't have agreement; changing to "exploring" design space might be too broad.
      - Could emulate anything with a bash script.
  - Consensus!

* keeping ecmascript-modules up to date [#197](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/197)
  - 5 minute timebox
  - Not enough time!
