# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2019-09-11

## Links

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YyuP1hAdWOk
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/383
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1pvFPml9LWjaCvCs6wBFitC_Hm3EorLrqOoP9FmZ2rV8

## Present

* Modules team: @nodejs/modules
* Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
* Jan Krems (@jkrems)
* Jordan Harband (@ljharb)
* Rob Palmer (@robpalme)
* Darcy Clarke (@darcyclarke)
* Geoffrey Booth
* Guy Bedford
* Bradley Farias
* Hassan Sani (@inidaname)

## Agenda

## Announcements
 
*Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### nodejs/modules

* Update Phase 3 per current status [#382](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/382)

GB: Status update, not altering any designs.
JH: WRT LTS would unflagging of things for CJS like @ as a root be able to be pushed in a minor or would it require a major.
GBD: It is expected to not land CJS features after LTS.
JH: Even if ESM is not unflagged for 12 LTS, I would like to ensure exports and package-root for CJS get through before 12 LTS.
JK: Having/expecting more discussion around CJS to unflag features before ESM it should be done to help alleviate concerns about breaking changes. CJS features are altering of behavior.
GB: Ok to land?
-- no objections --
SM: these features could tie our hands because people start using them, and it limits the design space when we do go for unflagging ESM. It could be either helpful or hurtful.
JH: We want to tie our hands, this means the features in CJS ensure they are in ESM.

* Divergent specifier hazard [#371](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/371)

GBD: Added a PR about loading ESM under .js causing errors is now on core. https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/29492
GB: A different PR with updated info on how to publish a package with both CJS and ESM sources. https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/29497 "." main PR is also coming and amend that PR. 
GBD: We should get a few more reviews of those PRs. Would these PRs resolve this issue?
JH: PR answers the question, even if it is not ergonomic. This underscores one of the use cases that is not being met / we lack a migration strategy. This seems to be an unpleasant thing that hinders adoption. I have serious concerns if we unflag without an ergonomic solution to the use case of shipping a single package that is both CJS and ESM, it may be better not to ship ESM.
GB: Encouraging people to use the "module" field provides a standardized place to document entry point for the module
JH: We are not standardizing that field. It is structured; but if node is not using it, we should not recommend it. This may poison the package.json ecosystem in the same way that altering builtin prototypes has done in the past.
JK: Agree partially with JH, migration strategy is not perfect/ergonomic. Trade off was made with if a package can force dependents to use a certain form of your package [CJS or ESM]. Discussion around if implicitly switching is dangerous or not. We have been erring on the side of avoiding breaking usage at the cost of ergonomics. This will be an issue with migration. I don't see an alternative without risks of accidental breakage. I would prefer to be conservative over ergonomics.
JH: Some large and popular packages do fall into the singleton problem being discussed. People will switch to ESM in a non-major version and this will break people. Packages maintaining singletons are aware of their problem and can use peerDependencies and/or manage their current solutions. It seems a safer approach to allow for the interop and not the current direction of things.
GBD: There are many ways of approaching this problem. JS community has experience with solving problems in creative ways. Approaching this hazard in a sensible way is good, but userland will also likely find ways to solve this. This leads into the next topic.
JK: Not just singletons, but also relying on Babel/TS interop are affected. An ESM package relying on CJS package moved to ESM could also blow up due to the difference in interop. People doing things in de-facto minor versions is more of a concern than the singleton hazard.
JH: How is that different from creating a second package/entry point?
JK: Their dependent would need to explicitly opt-in to the different version. Could alter the default, in which case it would still be implicit.
JH: As a package author adding something to package.json to declare multiple formats is sensible, but I do not want package consumers to need to know and/or opt-in to a specific format.

* Revisit dot-main in exports field [#368](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/368)

GBD: Dual environment use case and all features of "exports" are available to the "main" entry point. PR up on node core https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/29494 . Also allows a string rather than an object form. Affects both CJS and ESM, singleton package effectively with only 1 exported module.
SM: Is this always going to be a "bare" package? import(pkgName) vs import(pkgName/sub). Does this prevent searching nested packages?
JK: Only look at a single "exports" entry during a resolve, won't look at nested packages. import(foo/node_modules/bar) would only look through the top package.json in foo
SM: Does this search up for the package?
JK: It preparses the base name and doesn't search upward. Only looks at /((@scope)/)?name/ it doesn't allow arbitrary depth.

* Loader Hooks [#351](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/351)

BF: we split the hooks, altered some things for nested instrumentation, and need to add more success criteria.
GB: what is the status / who could give a way of building our own hooks.
BF: we don't have an implementation, this is design work. Our last implementation is from last July. I don't have hours to work on this.
GB: wasn't someone working on this?
JK / AA: ?? could start work on this ??
SM: perhaps we could recreate the new API by reimplementing it in the old hooks?
AA: We have a more modern multi-loader implementation
SM: Does this need any C++ work?
AA: Will take offline.
GBD: since loaders have become monumental, could we progressively land incremental loader evolution? What happens if we expect breaking changes for LTS?
BF: There is a history due to http2 shipping a breaking change even after being unflagged. Go through LTS WG -> TSC . Ping myles
GBD: we could upgrade our existing API to help ease forward compatibility.
SM: could change the existing API a different name to keep backwards compatible if we want to promise interop. I have concerns about having a true backwards compat story with the current APIs.
JK: It is worthwhile to make breaking changes as quick as possible for backward/forwards compat. Will reduce the pain either way. We should try and have something for LTS even if it called `--experimental-loader`.
GBD: Don't think we need to call it `experimental`
JK: As long as we mark things as experimental, the actual consumers of the existing API could be helped even with a breaking change due to only having a handful of usages in the wild currently.
GBD: It would be good to ensure that any breaking change we ship still allows writing a loader that runs in the older node versions / can ship a loader than works in the new API and the old API.

* Package Exports [#341](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/341)

SKIPPED

* Proposal: Support loading package by own "name" [#306](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/306)

JK: Discussion about options/specifiers. Compromise of using the `@` seems to lack outstanding usage / objections. Can think about it as the "non-scope". Last blocker for "exports", useful for some applications seeking to test their "exports". Could be used as a "require from root". Can move from Do Not Merge to a real PR. Right now only has CJS implementation and needs tests/docs.

-- Conclusion: Move forward with PR --

JK: Hope to merge next week. Might make sense to wait on approvals until the tests/docs are finished since right now it is ½ a PR.
