# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2019-05-08

* **Recording**:  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NCcIRQN7PHs
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/326
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/18ZUWtRYq-H5JwcFfGdUFsHi5Q5QB5mCbCngAM_N-MUE/edit

## Present

- Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
- Rob Palmer (@robpalme)
- Saleh Abdel Motaal (@SMotaal)
- Jordan Harband (@ljharb)
- Wes Wigham (@weswigham)
- Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
- John-David Dalton (@jdalton)
- Jan Krems (@jkrems)

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### `createRequire`

- `createRequire` is now available in Node 12 unflagged.

### nodejs/modules

* Proposal: CommonJS named exports defined in package.json [#324](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/324)
  - Orthogonal to dual-packages
  - `import { something } from "underscore"`
  - *out-of-order* and *dynamic modules* solutions are not making much progress - this is an alternative that would be replaced if we get either of the previous approaches - it's better than nothing
  - Jordan: If we have dual-mode packages, it becomes trivial for them to roll this themselves without needing package.json config
  - Saleh: If we can be diligent and add config to package.json, you could similarly wrap a module. <circularity discussion>
  - Jordan: Package.json config and ESM wrappers are equivalent in terms of being static and therefore impacting circularity.
  - Wes: There are non-main entrypoints to consider, so it's odd to be asymmetric.
  - Geoffrey: Do we want to pursue this?
  - Guy: Solutions can be pursued in parallel - not confined to one path.  Shooting down outright is not beneficial.
  - Wes: I don't think this is worth pursuing.
  - Geoffrey: We want to improve the general migration story.
  - CONCLUSION: Can be pursued in parallel. Contact Geoffrey if you're interested.

- Saleh: Can we synchronously await loading an ESM into a CommonJS module?
  - Wes: `std/esm` effectively does this. Guy Bedford's SystemJS did something like this.
  - Guy: All my projects were async and did not flatten to synchronous.
  - Saleh: Has the Regenerator approach been explored?
  - Wes: The C++ resolver for ESM is separate to the JS CJS resolver. Maybe we could migrate the CJS one to use C++?
  - Guy: Would this still allow use cases like std/esm
  - CONCLUSION: Deferred for now.

* Proposal for dual ESM/CommonJS packages [#273](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/273)
  - Specifies the new pkg.json field to point to the ESM entrypoint
  - Geoffrey: This does not conflict with Wes' require(ESM) proposal.  Are there objections?
  - Jordan: It's weird that the same specifier can resolve to separate things.  (idempotency)  If we have extension searching, we don't need the field.
  - Geoffrey: But extension searching is not moving forwards now. We can change our mind later.
  - Jordan: Want a holistic approach - not piecemeal. If we're going to solve this only for non-deep entrypoints, we shouldn't solve it at all.
  - Jan: In the past, we disagreed about whether extension searching would solve this. Having sibling files with .js and .mjs is a weird hybrid. More junk files. Would prefer not to go in this direction.
  - Saleh: Extension searching should be convention-based.
  - Geoffrey: People want everything. It's hard to get massive PRs through. Trying to be iterative. Could we start a branch on ES repo and put pieces in and build it early. 
  - Geoffrey: Asking for consensus: The proposal that adds a field to pkg.json (e.g. "exports")  for the ESM entrypoint - can we merge a PR on the basis that it can go away and the branch won't be upstreamed until consensus is reached?
  - Wes & Jordan state they would veto
  - Geoffrey: We had meetings on extension searching.  More than half opposed extension searching by default.
  - Jordan: We made it available behind a flag to get feedback. I think it will land. I think it's a much better way to do this.
  - Geoffrey: I don't think extension searching will land.
  - Jan: Can we put the pkg.json field behind a flag as we have done for extension searching? And how do we quantify the feedback - because users satisfied with the default will not speak up.
  - Jordan: We should ship pkg.json field behind a flag - it's a good way to collect feedback.
  - CONCLUSION: We implement behind a flag
  

* Feedback on extension resolution [#323](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/323)
* Proposal: Support loading package by own "name" [#306](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/306)
* Proposal for single-mode packages with optional fallbacks for older versions of node [#299](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/299)
* Moving forward with Dynamic Modules? [#252](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/252)

### nodejs/ecmascript-modules

* esm: experimental wasm modules [#46](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/46)
  - Jordan: Why can't WASM import live bindings?
  - Guy: WASM is a static format. Updating a binding's type is not compatible with this. Exports may need to go through a translation too.

* esm: scoped --type, cpp refactoring [#57](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/57)
* Exports main [#41](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/41)


