# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2019-07-17

## Links

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZByiwEcrSEo
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/349
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1vjst5ibYykhzdEcFCMhUHSLDY3N84gKr8bEr-JXpVfQ

## Present

* Myles Borins (@mylesborins)
* Jeremiah Senkpiel (@Fishrock123)
* Jan Krems (@jkrems)
* Alex Aubuchon (@A-lxe)
* Michael Dawson (@mhdawson)
* Gus Caplan (@devsnek)
* Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
* Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
* Bryan Clark (@clarkbw)
* Michael Zasso (@targos)
* Alex Mullans (@infin8x)
* Saleh Abdel Motaal (@smotaal)
* Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)

## Agenda

## Announcements
 
*Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### nodejs/modules

* Namespaces

BC: Tried to summarize the issue in the GitHub issue for the meeting. For the GitHub package registry, they want to be good citizens and co-exist with npm. There is a problem with namespacing - figuring out what the best resolution is, for GitHub to be effective for developer ergonomics and in customer aspects, how to fit in with the ecosystems and the recommended route. Using URLs to more completely describe where packages come from (npm registry uses a single global namespace eg `react` without any domain / destination). Trying to figure out how to integrate with that. Posted earlier on the TSC meeting - so some of the discussion is also happening there.

MB: Two different bits here. Proposal for TC39 looking to add builtin JavaScript modules into the JS VM. UUID is one being explored right now. std: and js: have been proposed as these approaches. Then also questions about if there should be namespaces for different types of modules - web:, etc. Do DOM-specific features belong in a JS namespace. That is one place things are being explored. The Web Assembly working group is also working with wasi: namespaces. Both of these standards organizations are looking at kind of like a URI scheme for how we do the namespaces. nodejs: is what we’re talking about in Node.js, or whether it should be @nodejs/. Personally have a bias towards schemes for consistency across environments. From GitHub’s perspective, would a registry itself be a namespace? Some concern from the Node TSC about making registries part of the specifier versus being something that exists in metadata such as the package.json.

JK: Entropic are in early stages and are also trying to figure out a way to distinguish different origins for packages as an additional namespace. For every registry to get its own protocol can be problematic. Intrigued in general by the idea of npm: for npm registry.

MD: Namespacing in the language seems different from namespacing for the registry.

BF: You can take some experience from what happened with mobile. Deep-linking into apps was done with protocols, which is now frowned upon. What they moved on to is something that is generally called universal links, where an app can occupy a scope within a protocol. For mobile operating systems, that is generally https. So they have a similar problem where they have to delegate to the proper app within these scopes. So maybe we should look into something like that and why they now frown upon things being third party to the operating system itself.

JS: Should also be think about where you are pulling the file from. Because otherwise we are effectively thinking about deconflicting node_modules between ‘registry’ specifiers.

JK: Prior work with Go and originally Java ecosystem com.github.* gives a URL/DNS bases ownership concept. Seems to be scaling well in that ecosystem.

JH: Are we talking about loading modules from anywhere except on disk? Assuming package manager handles installation, things like npm can already install from different registries per scope. It would be odd to not try and get package installers to support having installations support installation from all the different kinds/locations of packages in package.json . It would not be good for node to become involved in controlling where packages come from.

BC: npm always assumes that a GitHub URL is doing certain things against git. This is why we liked the idea of an npm: protocol. Also fear extra protocols as well. Tying the package back to a location we look at this in the long run as an IPFS style system helping out here. Because there may be a lot more locations in involved in packages, and we can mitigate this by having metadata that more concretely describes what the package is. When we hold the source we think we can provide a lot more information about how the package was built. Build receipts can provide information about what is in the package. Including handling the same package from a different source location.

If whatever we are doing requires client stages, including through npm, then that will be difficult for our customers to ensure they are on the latest npm client if we do have changes. Want to have a long-term and then possibly short-term approach.

* Loaders [#351](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/351)

AA: It would be nice to have a way of more generally providing hooks into dependency loading. At a more general level than either the CJS or ES module loading systems, more at the resource loading level. Opened an issue on the modules working group about this. There has been a lot of prior thought into loader hooks, like the --loader flag, per-dependency loaders, composing multiple loaders, as well as a lot of other things. I am hoping to kick off discussion again along that front and hopefully get things to a place where it is actionable again in terms of creating prototypes.

BF: If you’re mostly interested in CommonJS, that hasn’t been discussed at great length in this group. There were proof of concepts created last year about how to use atomics to properly call back into the main thread. I would be curious as to what you are wanting to do. A lot of the latest loader designs we’ve talked about this year have been based upon old designs from last year, and I was wondering if you have looked at those designs or if you think you need more APIs than just the loader hooks themselves. I did see you linked to also a generalized resource API, so general thoughts along that is what I am asking.

AA: Right now I am working in CommonJS because that is where a lot of the ecosystem is. From what I’ve seen of the current --loader API it doesn’t seem like there is the ability to easily compose loaders. If I create a loader and have it as the last loader on a project, how do I know I’m not overriding the functionality of previous loaders on some kind of stack. That is what was most noticeable to me. On the CommonJS side, hopefully we would be able to use that on the Node.js side to extend that to both module systems.

JK: To amend observations on that, I think in the past year or so… For example, when Entropic came out, they said they would not be loading from node_modules because users shouldn’t be doing that. Now it’s obviously not here, but Tink is not too far away. Plug and Play is at least not to far off. If we can provide loader hooks that can do transforms and loading from archives and that sort of stuff, then if we do not support CommonJS then we get to the weird place where if you want to write your code in CoffeeScript or TypeScript and transform your code on the fly, as people will want to do, then we need to make sure that if people have some stuff that is CommonJS that you can still use require.extensions for that piece. Whereas if CommonJS would also use the same loader infrastructure then we could actually phase out some users of require.extensions and people could use one loader hook to solve it.

SM: You’re really applying this to packages in your immediate control, but if we are going to try and break that barrier and say that this is a more universal thing, then we may have a module author saying they want their module loaded in a certain way. It might be too unpredictable to let every package decide how it wants to be loaded.

GC: One of the things that is somewhat taken for granted in ESM is the ability to have module resources that are not necessarily local disk resources - like you mentioned loading things out of an archive. And these things really do not play well with CommonJS, not that I am saying we shouldn’t try to pursue these goals. Even the keys in the require cache. There was a PR recently that changed the specifier that the code runs under in the attempts to improve the stack trace and this broke packages in the ecosystem that assumed the structure. I’m just concerned that trying to move forward with this we will find these sorts of things that can’t really be fixed in CommonJS. If a call comes from ESM it makes complete sense to give it some kind of RAM location, but if it comes from CommonJS it might completely break everything. That might break everything.

RD: That is a great segway in the kinds of problems we’ve had here for a while. We needed a way to load from disk that could be done at a platform level. To do that we had to know so much about CommonJS - we had to reimplement CommonJS so that it could work in memory. We created this bundle format with all of the source text and set it up. We have all of the files on disk, but none of the source text actually comes from disk, because hitting the file system cache on a container just takes too long.

JK: This would not be the default behaviour, and 100% coverage of CommonJS is not possible. But as a feature people can opt-into so that these tools is possible.

RD: The ability I wanted was just to provide source text without any knowledge of how CommonJS was supposed to be loaded. I’m much more interested in a low-level API I can provide source text, and have that decoupled from how modules are resolved. And that’s the API I see CJS and ESM can share. 

BF: We have multiple high-level runtimes. People are monkey-patching the file system API etc. to do stuff like this. They are not going to stop doing that unless we provide an alternative. If we want to actually lock down and provide better guarantees around module loading, we have to provide them an API. It’s not really an option. If you all think it’s fine just with a resource loading API, I would try to pass that.

* Package Exports [#341](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/341)


