# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2019-09-25

## Links

* **Recording**: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7c2gWo-g_Zs
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/386
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1JjL2yo8Mm3La_1-2P51PmJp2q4efE49YKyR62YxB6GA/edit

## Present

* Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
* Jan Krems (@jkrems)
* Ryan Day (@soldair)
* Alex Aubuchon (@A-lxe)
* Saleh Abdel Motaal (@SMotaal)
* Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
* Geoffrey Booth (@geoffreybooth)
* Hassan Sani (@inidaname)
* Rob Palmer (@robpalme)

## Agenda

## Announcements
 
*Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### nodejs/node

* esm: globals should be wrapped to stay in sync with ESM [#29426](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/29426)

I'm lacking context, but here's some rough notes - Alex

Myles: I played around with removing the flag, but found that it changed the way initialization worked -- involving proxies. Matteo gave a -1 on Bradley's PR for performance concerns.

Bradley: There's also an issue with getters.
A few approaches: disable importing the process module; allow the process module to go out of sync with the named exports; remove named exports from the process builtin; remove named exports from everything
We have to accept that we ban getters that throw.

Guy: There's a possibility of deprecation control by catching thrown errors.

Jan: At some point we will have to disallow naming certain properties. API design-wise, process and buffer were always focused around a default export, so restricting named exports isn't the worst thing.

Myles: It seems unergonomic to only have two builtins without named exports. Most people use the global process object, though that's not true for buffer.

Saleh: It might be a better path to have people import particular things from process. Selectively export particular things from process via a wrapper module around it. 

Guy: I'd be very much for keeping the ability to import process and buffer. In an environment without globals, it's nice to be able to rely on that.

Bradley: Keep things importable, no objections for removing names. Not sure what Saleh means by having only particular names. We would need a proxy around the entire object, which is the problem currently.

Saleh: I am thinking less about the primitive types, and more about the object types from the process object. Primitive values needing to be synced complicates things. ie for process.next, export a wrapper function.

Bradley: What about `process.next`?

Saleh: That would be a wrapper function `(...args) => actualProcess.next(...args)` or a proxy of it if necessary.

Bradley: Upstream is open to anything that doesn't impact the performance of process.next.

Bradley: We can't freeze builtins; too much of the ecosystem relies on monkeypatching them etc.

...

Guy: We could stop syncing between the esm and cjs exports. Loaders eventually would let us work around this (?).

Gus: Back when I added this proxy, it just copied the proxies. While I was adding this, I asked as a policy that we don't add any more deprecations that fire on access. 

Jan: We need to focus on the core choice that Bradley mentioned earlier, rather than getting into the weeds. It might be easiest to just make it impossible to import the builtins now.

Myles: This specific issue is absolutely blocking unflag. Any changes that we need to make outside esm need to land asap for this. If we remove the flag and that changes performance characteristics of cjs, then that could be considered a breaking change and prevent unflag. We should find a proposal for solving this and bring it upstream needs to happen in the next week and a half. Does anyone want to make a specific proposal?

Bradley: If we want to unflag, adding the proxy would be problematic, but leaving it out wouldn’t. I think letting esm+cjs go out of sync is fine. I can't see a clear solution that fixes all the edge cases.

Gus: How often do APMs patch things more than once after starting?

Bradley: An audit last year says not often, only one group was *interested* in doing it.

Saleh: Given going out of sync, can we determine where process/buffer will be snapshotted

Bradley: It has to be when first accessed (imported) but we could expose an API down the road to update the snapshot.

Gus: Just to clarify, first accessed, ie imported or required.

...

Myles: I'm plus one on removing the proxies. We could unflag, but keep things experimental -- allowing us to solve ecosystem issues that emerge in later versions.

...

Myles: Action item for Bradley to make these changes, using Guy's api proposal. (:+1: from Bradley)

### nodejs/modules

* Divergent specifier hazard [#371](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/371)

Geoffrey: There's not much going on here. A doc change was made, and there's not much more to be done for this version. 

* Loader Hooks [#351](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/351)

Action item for Alex to alter the flag scheme for esm loaders. Either add a flag to enable the --loader flag, or change the --loader flag to something like --experimental-loader.

* Proposal: Support loading package by own "name" [#306](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/306)

https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/29327

* Fallback Support Removed in Import Maps [#385](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/385)


