# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2019-07-03

## Links

* **Recording**: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2vSohstr-5M
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/346
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/11KCURwlDyTGebqAkOaImjISrauuwXS1DXpPXKpmp3GM/edit

## Present

* Modules team: @nodejs/modules
* Jan Krems (@jkrems)
* Myles Borins (@Mylesborins)
* Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
* Sendil Kumar (@sendil
kumarn)
* Rob Palmer (@robpalme)
* Saleh Abdel Motaal (@smotaal)
* Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
* John-David Dalton (@jdalton)


## Agenda

## Announcements
 
*Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### nodejs/modules

* Package Exports [#341](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/341)

PR is open https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/72


* All Modules go into a namespace [nodejs#21551](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/21551)
  - Refs: https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/28466
