# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Meeting 2019-04-24

* **Recording**:  N/A due to technical problems 😭
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/317
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/12hKVk4C9PNkHHZoOQA6I2Y_oUlAPteDTnEIyyp9Odqc/edit

## Present

- Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
- Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
- Daniel Rosenwasser (@DanielRosenwasser)
- Jeremiah Senkpiel (@Fishrock123)
- Rob Palmer (@robpalme)
- Saleh Abdel Motaal (@SMotaal)
- Gus Caplan (@devsnek)
- Michael Zasso (@targos)
- Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
- Jan Krems (@jkrems)
- Jordan Harband (@ljharb)
- Hassan Sani (@inidaname)
- John-David (@jdalton)
- Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)

## Agenda

Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### Approve PR (5 Minutes)

* Governance: "Pull Requests" post Phase 2 upstream [#311](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/pull/311)
  - CONCLUSION: NO OBJECTIONS

### Discussion (50 minutes)

* Review Phase 3 [#316](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/316)
  - 10 minute timebox
  - MB: Want to identify objections to break out into separate issues.
  - Loader solution: no objections. Guy, Saleh, Gus volunteer as co-champions.  Maybe form a group?
  - Dual-mode packages: to be (two approaches) or not to be.  Geoffrey, Jordan as co-champions.
  - createRequire:
    - MB: discovered `makeRequireFunction(".")`.  Maybe make dot the default.
    - JH: Maybe this is not necessary if we get dual-mode packages
    - SM: Needs to be detectable in non-Node, e.g. prefer global over `import.meta`
    - JS: If no dual-mode, this needs to be very simple. Current is not good enough.
    - Champion: Myles
- import map equivalent
  - JH: This is important.  Want to have it for both CJS and ESM. Depends on outcome of dual-mode packages.
  - WW: No reason for this to be format-specific. Agree with Jordan.
  - GB: This is itself a dual-mode proposal, due to lack of full backporting.
  - WW: Dual-mode to allow packages to work in old Node is not "dual mode" that we are talking about here.
  - Champion: Jan Krems
  - Participants: Saleh
- Auto-detection of entrypoints
  - Champion: Geoffrey (if we even do this)
  - Participants: Saleh

* To Dual Mode or Not to Dual Mode
  - 30 minute timebox
  - Refs:
    - Exports main [#41](https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/41)
    - Proposal for dual ESM/CommonJS packages [#273](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/273)
    - Proposal for single-mode packages with optional fallbacks for older versions of node [#299](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/299)

- Jordan: Gist is that starting to use ESM as soon as it's unflagged is that it's a breaking change for all consumers and that they'll have to swap from `require` to `import`. That's pretty unnecessary and it can cause a fork in the ecosystem.
    - At one time there was a hope that you could just `require` an ESM, there was an idea about extension resolution (cjs/mjs), there were lots of things here.
    - Two singletons in graph.
    - First thing we need to decide on is whether switching to ESM is the "right thing" or if we do want to improve the incremental migration story.
- Geoffrey: Talking about bare specifiers (when require/import "package")
    - One question to allow bare specifier to be mapped to another 

* Proposal: Support loading package by own "name" [#306](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/306)
  - 5 minute timebox
* Moving forward with Dynamic Modules? [#252](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/252)
  - 5 minute timebox
