# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Out of Band Meeting 2019-10-30

## Links

* **Recording**:  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vaCSI7drtw8
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/408
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1YZP6Sa5_qhXFaKN_rqO823AhN6PyvXRNYYstO_Cq21U/

## Present

* Michael Zasso (@targos)
* Jan Krems (@jkrems)
* Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
* Guy Bedford (@guybedford)
* Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
* Saleh Abdel Motaal (@SMotaal)
* Jordan (@ljharb)
* Sven Sauleau (@xtuc)
* Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)

## Agenda

* Myles: Summary of the background for this meeting. We ran out of time last regular meeting and stopped short of making decisions around unflagging.

### Windows path separators in specifiers [nodejs/node#30169](https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/30169)

* Reflag exports (1 open question: https://github.com/nodejs/node/issues/30169)?

TL;DR: No clear outcome yet, throwing back to issue.

#### Divergent specifier hazard (DiSH) [#371](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/371)

* Geoffrey: Shared gist, summed up hazard still being a thing with pkg and pkg/module
* Jan: Amend - even pkg and pkg-es are affected. Afaik only completely dropping support for CJS in new major removes the hazard
* Myles: Was very bullish on preventing hazard. Looking at developer experience, it’s more subtle. For consumers of plugins etc. it can still be invisible if that plugin is using the cjs or esm specifier. Solution is to educate about the issues around module singletons. No matter what we choose, we need to educate people. Dev experience difference between conditional exports vs. non-conditional exports is huge. Feels spiteful / baby out with the bath water to not have the feature.
* Guy: Follow-up on education. People want the superior experience of modules, want to ship them. Largest libs will do dual-mode safely as long as we can clearly communicate how to do it. If they don’t, they’ll quickly adjust based on bug reports. Issue is libraries on the edge / long tail that may not be aware. Communication is better than letting the ecosystem loose. People will also follow precedent of large libs. Hopefully also a temporary problem as CJS becomes less prevalent.
* Myles: Past argument was to ask big open source about their issues. Held it up in the past as examples for how bad the hazard is. This could now be a feature, we know people will find it quickly and will push for fixing them.
* Wes: Having dual entrypoints leads to a pit of failure, people will fall into the singleton issues by default.
* Guy: That’s why we should encourage wrapper modules as a pattern.
* Myles: What is an API to manually register the module in another cache?
* Jordan: How to make the two modules the same, at runtime? You can do it right now by getting the require cache from ESM.
* Geoffrey: That’s sounds like you want to do require(esm)..?
* Myles: Thinking about it from the other side, unidirectional. Create require function, access cache, in esm module before exporting set it in the CJS cache. If it’s later required, it would be loader from that object.
* Guy: That can be done using current APIs.
* Myles: That’s another possible way to avoid the hazard.
* Geoffrey: Have PR with more recommended patterns, first is wrapper that should be safe. Also mentions strategies to reduce singleton issues if not using a wrapper.
* Jan: My current theory is that for most of the long-tail, they will only appear once in an app. So in practice they will only appear as either CJS or ESM per project. So compiling using babel is completely fine.
* Myles: Want to continue with discussion around issues before seeking consensus.

#### Conditional exports proposal [#401](https://github.com/nodejs /modules/issues/401)

* Guy: Goal of PR is to extend the exports field to also allow objects as opposed to strings that express conditionals/branches in the resolution based on environment. It evolved out of rollup/parcel discussions around a userland/bundler-level “targets” field. Hope was that we could join forces and use the same kind of solution in node, browsers, electron, etc.. It’s up to runtime/environment to determine priority of resolutions. Can be analyzed by tooling.
* Wes: CJS/ESM branch is special because it varies within a runtime. Other conditions branch based on global runtime.
* Guy: If ecosystem tools do not accept it, there may be a path to deprecate it. We should put it out there as an experimental feature (unflagged) so we can get feedback.
* Myles: One thing that was brought up was the question around “default”. We’re talking about “module”, “default”, “node”. Find the exact distinction confusing.
* Guy: I’d be very tempted to not document the node condition. I’m of the opinion that the node mono-culture won’t last and there’s a future of many different runtimes. While it is the mono-culture, default should be generally used. I wouldn’t remove the node condition.
* Jan: I think modules using node APIs should generally call themselves out, to guard their behavior. Default should generally be for code that’s portable.
* Jordan: If I want to import(pkg/feature), how do I designate what to use in the conditional expression? Believe node should exist.
* Myles: For sake of time, we don’t have time to work through final list of conditions that should be supported by node. When we try to reach consensus, we could reach consensus on behaviors without locking down these details. Perhaps for the consensus better to focus on high level requirements and capabilities.
* Jan: Should consider switching back to require guard. Default should be portable and CJS isn’t portable.
* Guy: We can investigate, don’t need to lock this down (to Myles’ point above).

### Reaching Consensus

### Topics to reach consensus on

* Allow divergent specifier hazard
* Allow dual mode modules
* Landing Conditional Exports Proposal
  - Behind a flag?
  - Blocks unflagging?
  - Conditional Mapping
  - Alternative entry points a single specifier within node.js runtime
* Unflagging
  - What features need to be unflagged first?
  - Dual mode modules blocking unflagging?
  - Timeline
- Ways to move forward
- Continuing activity of the group

### Consensus reached with quorum of voting members present

* Landing conditionals behind a flag
* Unflag ESM with current implementation
* Document Conditionals / Hazards / Patterns
* Deadline End of January to move forward with dual modules
* Unflag conditionals w/o dual mode asap

* Wes: Don’t understand why we’re back to letting dual instance packages be a thing. Nothing seems to have changed fundamentally.
* Jan: The alternative changed, for me.
* Geoffrey: There’s strong ecosystem demand (proven by modules field). We should have strong reasons to not support it.
* Wes: I can get behind the use case. But I’m not fine with the current solution. I’m more happy to accept a preload field that opts people into it.
* Geoffrey: It doesn’t exist, should we consider it if it maybe works out but also maybe not works?
* Wes: I think we shouldn’t ship something that’s either sub-standard or doesn’t allow all important use cases.
* Guy: I don’t think preload is better, may require globbing node_modules tree. Also could lead to out-of-order execution.
* Wes: There may be differences, depending on how preload works.
* Guy: This seems to introduce non-determinism into execution.
* Wes: Isn’t that also true for conditional exports?
* Guy: Execution is deterministic.
* Myles: It’s currently possible to insert things into the require cache. We should try to create APIs that make it safer but it shouldn’t be implicit / magic. We shouldn’t underestimate how much node cares about startup time. Just because we think of something we’d like to do, if something slows down startup or runtime, it will be rejected upstream. Proxies got rejected for that same reason. It led to a footgun: Updating CJS built-ins without calling sync function gets ESM bindings out of sync. Other example was bootstrap refactor needed to make node work with promises during startup. We can reach consensus but we have to be aware that core needs to accept our decisions.
* Wes: Cost of multiple instances is bad performance. I’m dissatisfied with any solution that supports multiple copies (CJS and ESM).
* Geoffrey: Node supports both CJS and ESM. People will access both from the same package.
* Guy: Most users will have the naive expectation that node will support the module field. Either we provide a solution or they will find a solution that we may not like.
* Myles: Any objections?
* Wes: I object.
* Myles: Leading into - does dual mode block unflagging? Does anybody object to unflagging without dua mode? Even if we think that it may be solved in a future release?
* Jordan: I object.
* Myles: We have a deadlock. We need to resolve to move forward. JSON, WASM, etc. are on the horizon. Import maps, loaders may also be something in the future. We’re now at an impasse. How do we move forward? Should we have a vote? We can’t do it today, we should have a true majority. Should we introduce rough consensus? Asking generically: If we talked about this to its conclusion, can somebody say “I believe most people think X” and acknowledge that the rough group consensus is X. This would prevent a vote. Three options: Vote, rough consensus, or end of group.
* Geoffrey: Attempt at compromise. Are you objecting to the current master?
* Wes: If we unflag today, I would feel confident that we could move towards more complete and good.
* Geoffrey: We could agree to merge, with flagged conditional exports. Wes talked about preload. If those solutions come to fruition within a set timeframe, we could replace conditional exports with something like preload. If that doesn’t work, we’d default to conditional exports.
* Wes: Could we merge flagged conditional exports and kick the can down the road? Sure. Also, having conditional exports w/o require/module guard is valuable. Clarifying: Supporting the schema but not inconsistent resolution within the same runtime. Even okay merging it without a flag.
* Jordan: We can establish rough consensus, even if we don’t move forward with it right now. To Wes: Flagging a resolution feature will be problematic once ecosystem adoption picks up.
* Geoffrey: Is this a question of timeline?
* Jordan: Actively maintained packages will get pushed to adopt it quickly.
* Myles: Independent of usage or issues: The contract is that as long as it’s behind a flag, we can make major changes. Especially if it’s only on stable but not LTS node.
* Guy: Possible restrict flag to require/module, the rest being part of the baseline implementation.
* Myles: Suggesting consensus. Land conditional exports behind additional flag. Unflag ESM with current implementation. Document conditionals, hazard, and how to address the hazard. Set timeline to end of January until we have to find an alternative.
* Wes: How about we make the whole decision in three months?
* Jan: Would it be worse if we spread pkg/esm?
* Myles: Those packages won’t break, so it may be just an incremental improvement.
* Jordan: Suggest adding docs asking people not to publish ESM packages. Questioning value of unflagged state without a solution for dual mode. Is it better to unflag all at once a few months down the line? Maybe shortening the timeline to end of year?
* Guy: The longer we don’t unflag, the more people are trying to adjust but can’t get proper feedback on how well their setups work. With 12 LTS missed, there’s questions about our progress. Would like to unflag as experimental to get more feedback.
* Myles: Worth considering that node 14 is heading for LTS, cut in April. If we want to stabilize in 14, we should have everything unflagged ahead of that branch cut.
* Myles: Any objections to:
  - Land conditional exports behind additional flag.
  - Document hazard around singleton.
  - Unflag modules with that state in node 13. This preserves the experimental warning.
  - At the end of January, if there’s no better alternative for dual packages, we will remove the conditional exports flag and turn the feature on by default.
* Wes: Clarifying that we’ll still discuss in a meeting before removing the flag.
Myles: Clarifying that end of January is a deadline. We can make decisions earlier with consensus.
* *no objections*
* Guy: Want to propose addendum - only leave the require/import switch behind the additional flag. Assuming that we can get upstream approval around naming etc.
* Myles: Clarifying that we’ll default to having the entire implementation behind flag if details cannot be worked out.
* *no objections*
