# Node.js Foundation Modules Team Out of Band Meeting 2019-03-04

* **Recording**:  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5TGRRlFbbEA
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/282

## Present

- John-David Dalton (@jdalton)
- Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
- Jan Krems (@jkrems)
- Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
- Kevin Smith (@zenparsing)
- Jeremiah Senkpiel (@Fishrock123)

## Agenda

### Automatic File Extension/Directory Index Resolution

- Myles summarized https://github.com/nodejs/modules/blob/master/doc/plan-for-new-modules-implementation.md
- Myles offers proposal: build automatic file extension/directory index resolution behind an additional flag
- He feels without it included we leave open design space, while with it we exclude space
- He wants to allow the ecosystem to experiment with this, get responses from the community to see how much or how little they want this feature
- Concern is that without having it at all, without flagged, there’s no opportunity for experimentation; whereas without the flag, no one will likely experiment with not using searching

- Jordan: most controversy is around defaults rather than capabilities. If the flag doesn’t alter likelihood of whether or not it ships as default, we would be fine with flagged; but this likely does alter that calculus.
- If we ship extension resolution off by default and on by a flag, versus on by default and off by a flag, and you think that people will experiment more with the former, doesn’t that speak to user desire?
- Myles: People already have code assuming searching, so we don’t really know what the desire is. Also is design space we haven’t figured out yet, such as “main” field for dual packages. To the point on defaults and capabilities, turning on later is something we will likely offer later even as an app-level loader but we don’t have consensus as to what should be the default.

- Guy: Follow up as to polarity on this: people already expect extension searching to work, and what we’re doing by removing it is that we’re saying that this is under consideration, and we should make that clear. If we ship it in the same, and we change it later it will seem like taking the candy away from the baby. Changing it now sets expectations. These arguments come down to managing users’ expectations.

- Gus: Have a few things to say. I’ve actually made this enormous JS engine written in JS, and as an experiment I’ve not used any extension/index resolution, and my experience with that has been that it results in maybe three times I’ve had to run a find/replace regex to fix things resulting in that. Myles: Is that unacceptable or reasonable? Gus: I was able to do it, but it was terrible.
- Myles: Gus, to your point, my feeling is that the intuition that you have and Jordan has that we have to ship this whether we like it or not because the community expects it may be correct. If we ship it behind a flag, we will get a signal from the community extremely quickly. If we don’t ship even with a flag, we might get pushback even before merging the upstream. Shipping with a flag lets people opt in to the experience they want and give us the feedback. If we ship with it on, we won’t get that feedback. Doing it this way (with a flag) gives us an opportunity to do what we were hoping to do with the polls. Doing our upstream implementation gives us one shot to do some ecosystem advocacy to get awareness and feedback to help guide us moving forward. A flag may create friction but that would be good, to generate feedback.

- JDD: Does Node have any precedent in opting into telemetry for flag use? Gus: Not that I know of. Geoffrey: We could query GitHub to look for package.json run scripts to look for flags used in projects. Myles: Can help with scanning work.

- Kevin: Would caution that design space is not as open as we’d like it to be. Lot of choices you can make for resolution, but once you start making choices you find yourself following choices similar to current CJS implementation. Another choice would be going in a completely different direction like export maps. If we did have a flag that might lead the process in one direction rather than another.

- Jordan: What are we trying to achieve with user feedback here? It should be taken as a given that there will be nonzero people that will find their workflow seriously impeded without extension resolution. What are you expecting to get?
- Myles: My intention would be to see how strong the reaction from the community is. Similar to .mjs, we’ve found ways to appease the complaints that people brought forward. It’s possible that the feedback we get may not be entirely actionable, but it will give us more information than we have today. We may get positive feedback.
- Geoffrey: Other users might want this disabled by default in order to get packages to be browser-safe by default.
- Gus: Those people have failed to persuade packages to change.
- Jordan: Why should that argument influence us?

- Kevin: I think we can predict that people will take a look at the flag and compare it against the experience they get with “esm” and Babel and feel like things are missing based on that comparison. To try to make some attempt to get away from that comparison was my drive to create the “web modules” for Node implementation. If we present it without a new story we can predict the feedback we’ll get.

- Guy: On the user feedback point, it’s important to note that the user feedback we get doesn’t make the decision for us, just as with .mjs it’s still our decision. There are many other factors that play into this decision, and to state a strong argument like Gus does that it’s impossible to make node_modules work in a browser is a strong argument without evidence.
- Gus objects, crosstalk, discussion of unpkg.com. Gus claims that there’s still bundling happening somewhere.
- Guy: It’s not an obvious point and we should be careful in such a design space, there are new things happening on the Web that affect how the whole ecosystem is going to work. And to deny that the ecosystem is shifting is also a mistake. Where we sit in the middle it’s a difficult thing to predict. We will have more information in 3-6 months’ time to more fully investigate this space. There are things coming out like pika, we should hold back and see what happens before we make a decision.
- Myles: Building on what Guy said, turning it on by default makes decisions that influence other things like dual packages.

- Saleh: My personal experience: requiring .mjs in experimental, the way resolution worked with a loader you could bring in extension matching etc. Just the fact that I could not resolve without .mjs early on changed all the tools that I was relying on forced me to explore different workflows than I was used to. The insights I got shocked me, I went into directions I didn’t think I was going to explore. A year and a half later, I think we have to be careful saying that because it worked it should continue to work and that since people didn’t show favor in that direction it should continue to. Since Myles proposes that this is an opt-in conscious decision, whoever’s experimenting knows which path they would like to see this move forward with. Forcing them to experiment give us a more complete picture as to what people think works for them.

- Gus: We can enable extension searching without dual-mode by changing around the loader, I have a POC.
- Myles: Based on the conversation that we’ve had, do we have consensus on moving forward with this behind a flag? (silence)
- Jordan: To clarify, this is still a question to be settled in Phase 3?
- Myles: Yes. As we upstream this, we will need to reevaluate how we work as a group as to how we tackle these problems. Re “exports”, extensions map, there’s a wave of other things that making a decision on this will inform.
- Jordan: Can we have either option be achievable via flag? E.g. turning it off is also a flag option, even if it’s a noop for now.
- Myles/Geoffrey: Yes. Like --type=commonjs right now.

### Other topics

https://github.com/nodejs/ecmascript-modules/pull/47

- Reverts commit that we had removing the loader API
- Myles and Guy discussed and felt that there wasn’t a way to move forward with the new loaders implementation before mid-March without making decisions that Brad should be a part of.
- Will add back in old loaders implementation with extra warning that screams that this loaders implementation is deprecated and will be replaced. So people know, and we’re not breaking current workflows, but users are warned.
- Any objections? None.
- Will document this as deprecated in the docs.
- Any objections to landing this by Wed or Thu? None.

https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/286

- Steps to upstream document
- Myles explains that dates are based on Node 12 release schedule, the dates prior are backdated from that.
- We should try to get remaining work done by the 13th so that we can open the PR by March 20th.
- Any concerns/thoughts around these dates?
- Jordan: Wants extensions map in next few weeks, but okay with dates.
- Jan: No special meaning about what can go in or can’t go in?
- Myles: Right. Once we land things upstream we need to think about what it means to keep working on this. Keep moratorium upstream? Keep fork? Charter our group? There’s a whole slew of other governance-related questions we need to work on, but there’s no reason we can’t upstream our monolith and iterate when we get there.
- Myles: To your point about extension maps, our current consensus on phase 2 did not include them, but yet we could add them quickly afterward.
- Jordan: We may want to reevaluate that we have a sugar for a specialized subset for what my implementation achieves. I’m less confident that we’ll be able to rip out that sugar that lives in published packages.
- Myles: I’m certain that we will need to change things that will affect packages that people have published if they did so based on our experimental branch. I’m hoping that those breaking changes are at a faster pace. And I’m hoping future iterations will happen far faster. Does that appease your concern?
- Jordan: Hopefully.

- Next step is to update planning document: move loaders to phase 3, update to reflect this meeting re extension searching behind a flag.
- Geoffrey: I’ll make a PR to do that, can I get consensus that such a PR can land? No objections.

https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/286

- Any objections to PRs that specifically concern the points in the TODO list for upstreaming being merged between meetings if the PR has no objections for 48 hours?
- Discussion: Just related to this list? Yes, this is just the stuff in 286, docs, old loaders implementation, extension searching behind a flag. No new features slipping in, no extension maps.
- No objections.

- Myles congratulates the group on finding consensus and is miraculously not cut off mid-word.
