# Node.js  Modules Team Meeting 2020-03-11

## Links

* **Recording**:  http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9o90Z20fFIE
* **GitHub Issue**: https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/494
* **Minutes Google Doc**: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1KZBgLnJn3ZejOIitOqTylXwKdCBZ7Byka9T3fUch3wU/edit

## Present

- Geoffrey Booth (@GeoffreyBooth)
- Myles Borins (@MylesBorins)
- Jan Krems (@jankrems)
- Wesley Wigham (@weswigham)
- Jordan Harband (@LJHarb)
- Corey Farrell (@coreyfarrell)

## Agenda

## Announcements
 
*Extracted from **modules-agenda** labelled issues and pull requests from the **nodejs org** prior to the meeting.

### nodejs/node

* module: expose exports conditions to loaders [#31303](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/31303)

- did not have this functionality exposed to userland yet
- conversation active in repo
- Geoff explains alternative proposal
- Discussion
- No action, continue discussion in repo

* WIP: Move ESM loaders to worker thread [#31229](https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/31229)

- removing label
- jan mentioned https://github.com/nodejs/node/pull/32068 as an FYI about a PR that can be used to unblock this PR progress

### nodejs/modules

* Chartering the Modules team [#412](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/412)

- Went over high-level steps last time. No urgent need identified, decided to punt on it for now.
- Geoffrey/Jordan/Myles happy to work on this just not now.
- For standards group, used part of regular meetings to pair on this. May be possible here.

* Patch/Instrument a module [#339](https://github.com/nodejs/modules/issues/339)

- Removing label for now, no active work.
- Bradley is looking into loader hook composition in general.

* [m.parent]

- Bradley shared module.parent issues in general.
- No active work.
- Jordan: module.parent is a misfeature (“which module happens to require this first”). Determine if an entrypoint is important but module.parent isn’t it.
- Myles: WASM group discussed how “knowing if entrypoint” could look like, including magical exported function.
- Myles: Bradley’s comment reflects overall opinion in the room
- (no objection)

### Stability and Flags

- Myles: Currently 30+ open issues and 15+ open PRs. Seems like a signal that modules are fully stabilized and are ready to remove all warnings.
- Jordan: How many are about loaders vs. core modules?
- Myles: (List of issues) Most aren’t connected to loaders.
- Guy: None of these are bugs, mostly confusing.
- Jordan: Wouldn’t count many of these beyond documentation issues.
- Jordan: Loaders were marked as out of scope for core module features.
- Myles: Disagree about the phrasing.
- Wes: Pretty sure it doesn’t work with absolute paths on Windows.
- Jan: Neither does it work for arbitrary paths on Linux (URL paths != unix paths).
- Myles: There are usability issues and it’s confusing for people to use. Don’t feel like we could remove the experimental status before node 14.
- Geoffrey: Doesn’t matter, we can remove the warning during the lifetime of 14.
- Myles: Like to see this completely stabilized, including docs stable, before end of life of 10.
- Guy: Not going to strongly argue either way. Can accept the warning in node apps. Think it’s the wrong decision for node.js as a project. It’s pushing people to other solutions. Rather use deno and not get warnings etc.. The signal is it’ll be another year before users can use it, really.
- Corey: Not sure what we’d expect to change that would break user code. No strong opinion on 14.x. Would be unfortunate if first LTS doesn’t support warning-less ESM. Full LTS cycle before maintainers would be comfortable to use ESM widely.
- Myles: Would it be better to say “before 14 LTS”? Sometime before October.
- Wes: Is it good to pick deadline vs. picking a target stability/maturity?
- Myles: Valuable signal to users to have the warning (“there are rough edges”). Corey has made a good point around removing the warning at least for 14 LTS. Docs issues are as important as bugs. Tells us that users are failing to adopt it, wasting their time. That’s another existential risk for node (user churn).
- Geoffrey: Like to triage the issues and classify severity.
- Myles: I think there is a difference between runtime stability and readiness. Our ability to triage issues and update the repo.
- Jan: Bar should be a good funnel for users to succeed, not just a possible state where people may succeed (if they discover it).
- Guy: Agreed on higher level concerns about our ability to maintain a good experience. But from a bug/feature perspective, it’s fairly stable, incredibly stable as far as software goes. We still have to take ownership on all the supporting processes. Regrettable if that causes much more delays.
- Corey: Concern was mostly about runtime warning, doc status “experimental” not a blocker for next LTS.
- Myles: One of the sign-offs at Google is “DevRel” and “Docs” signoff. Agreed that implementation is super stable, agreed with Guy. Need to make sure the other aspects match it. Will work on a clearer bar for when it’s ready to remove warning or change doc status.
